#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.3cm
\topmargin 2cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2.5cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Subsection*
Research in context
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Evidence before this study
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, many studies provided evidence
 for the effectiveness of strategies such as self-distancing and improved
 hygiene to reduce the spread of the disease.
 These studies are underlying the recommendations of the World Health Organisati
on, but the actual implementation of the intervention is affected by the
 local conditions and resources.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Mathematical model is the basis of many epidemiological studies and policies
 about COVID-19.
 Models applied at the national level suggest that the Syrian health system
 will be saturated just four weeks after an outbreak.
 The situation of the small Internally Displaced People (IDP) camps---more
 self-contained, but with less access to services and facilities typically
 available in cities---limits the applicability of national-scale studies.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The conditions in IDP camps is similar, in some aspects, to Rohingya refugee
 camps in Bangladesh, for which existing studies forecast a significant
 impact of COVID-19.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Added value of this study
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We developed a mathematical model to study the dynamics of COVID-19 accounting
 for the demographics and living conditions in Syrian Internally Displaced
 People (IDP) camps.
 We performed extensive simulations for a range of parameter values to provide
 statistically robust recommendations on the impact of several strategies
 to prevent the spread of COVID in IDP camps.
 We designed the intervention strategies ---self-distancing, shielding,
 isolation---in a conversation with camp workers and directors to ensure
 the feasibility of its implementation.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Implications of all the available evidence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Evidence points to the effectiveness of simple, realistic strategies to
 mitigate the impact of COVID in Syrian IDP camps.
 A combination of strategies that can be implemented in a context of limited
 resources will have a significant effect on the impact of COVID-19 on the
 population of IDP.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
