# Infectious Period Duration Sources

The most extensive study on the subject is this one from [Canada](https://watermark.silverchair.com/ciaa638.pdf?token=AQECAHi208BE49Ooan9kkhW_Ercy7Dm3ZL_9Cf3qfKAc485ysgAAAoUwggKBBgkqhkiG9w0BBwagggJyMIICbgIBADCCAmcGCSqGSIb3DQEHATAeBglghkgBZQMEAS4wEQQMghBRn1unZjPy3EIMAgEQgIICODxHXFdJdU4wS58vdkWYSp47ibxh07fw-5Q4DWutWjB-gMLU3HDwQaRaxcGl5AZVkZj-liBAcEaFquGNj0LjTL7D3zhDk2N_pSvxYW4Cawo9BPB2AavAqaqLMoUhk6aO5YqgHW4tI5YRFjZc1-vQrMWSTgCY34F-1AXu2aKOoG5oNTOGEnqaZ4QW6TWq12oOCcXIYkW45JwNRBWybYlzzSjvEUEN8S5GEVe3vLB4BDzyJeYgpqBPUG2qxkqaGc18FBff51CLwVbhhPbKhuF4-50OhKCw7d6azr6htAEVTa5yMJWE_35hvbfr-kF-rs1L8NhiFkcIha7NKRa8PCVEX4nBBDQ4GxSM6RKQSQ_j10COTOAgdcZ26o7S7s08x4F9QLob3bsZ5jIdozr3LEZJTYTJL_Kv8Jj091-FqSZQaxTHiMEuHpvh9eSDVb7Yts8LWwAOjQpFVytdylrqLl13kigabaJyKbnKqXa8kJd9tY_Sd2T3qRvvHLkcP3ph5pIBo5lt3Cl2Tp-hctMaYxP_fGqv_u0UM1UO0twy0ZOgRcWkZ_m52kx93NrpJKWGnh6oGv1ijhULXABj1n9AgcZjFPFBSsSuCGrD-s24xTAf6u_dUgP7ADa_KX1Qi7WJFXkYROIp_M_ewA5pUkNaQ4c_yu-bpEFXYCSirw1Pk2DWqdxshEHcNoUdPjPomXu6yzlFTyNV6osHHZB2xjsTnz9KFYdozynnb4bG0FhX6-XVuyfWM3tX2D-7xYE). They analyzed samples from 90 patients and here are their conclusions: 
- Positive cultures of the virus were only observed up to 8 days post symptom onset (they tried to cultivate virus collected up to 21 days post symptom onset).
- They determined that for every one day increase in time between symptom onset and test, the odds ratio of being cultured positive was decreased by 37%. 

The limitations of this study: 
- they could only successfully cultivate viral samples from 26 patients (not 90)
- they don't specify the clinical severity of the symptoms of the patients but they specify that immunocompromised individuals and children may be underrepresented in their study.

Another source of information on the subject is the US CDC. Their key findings are the following:
1. Viral burden measured in upper respiratory specimens declines after onset of illness (CDC unpublished data, Midgely 2020, Young 2020, Zou 2020, Wölfel 2020).
2. **At this time, replication-competent virus has not been successfully cultured more than 9 days after onset of illness. The statistically estimated likelihood of recovering replication-competent virus approaches zero by 10 days** (CDC unpublished data, Wölfel 2020, Arons 2020).
3. As the likelihood of isolating replication-competent virus decreases, anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG can be detected in an increasing number of persons recovering from infection (Wölfel 2020).
4. Attempts to culture virus from upper respiratory specimens have been largely unsuccessful when viral burden is in low but detectable ranges (i.e., Ct values higher than 33-35[1])(CDC unpublished data).
5. Following recovery from clinical illness, many patients no longer have detectable viral RNA in upper respiratory specimens. Among those who continue to have detectable RNA, concentrations of detectable RNA 3 days following recovery are generally in the range at which replication-competent virus has not been reliably isolated by CDC (CDC unpublished data, Young 2020).
6. No clear correlation has been described between length of illness and duration of post-recovery shedding of detectable viral RNA in upper respiratory specimens (CDC unpublished data, Midgely 2020, Wölfel 2020).