#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage{lipsum}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 2.3cm
\topmargin 2cm
\rightmargin 2cm
\bottommargin 2.5cm
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes true
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\author 1315279813 "smart360"
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Empowering the crowd: Feasible strategies 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

 to minimize the spread of COVID-19 
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash

\backslash

\end_layout

\end_inset

 in
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597186078
 high-density
\change_unchanged
 informal settlements
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Authors names TBA
\end_layout

\begin_layout Address
Add your affiliation here.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
lipsum[1]
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Part*
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 1315279813 1597196542
Since March 2020, actors of humanitarian assistance are warning about the
 catastrophic consequences of a Covid-19 outbreak in low-income countries
 as well as countries ravaged by war.
 The populations living in high-density settlements with empovered and low-incom
e inhabitants, and the usually associated low access to water, health and
 commodities common in richer populations, are highly exposed to the Covid-19
 pandemic.
 Not only they are at risk of having their economic situation aggravated,
 but they might also be more exposed to health issues if their local health
 system is not able to cope with the potentially high numbers of cases requiring
 tests, medication or hospitalization.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_deleted 1315279813 1597187019
There is still a substantial number of low-income countries in which the
 COVID-19 pandemic has not reached its fullest potential.
 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
APG: the following is just an example, we are looking for a comparison that
 allow us to warn that this work is important because in many places in
 which our work is relevant, the virus has not appeared yet
\end_layout

\end_inset

 In the beginning of August 2020, the number of cases reported in African
 countries per inhabitant was XXX.
 These numbers are still far from those reported in (XXX e.g.
 Europe).
 The fragile health-systems in these countries [Ref], in particular regarding
 critical care [Ref], and the often lack of access to basic services such
 as water sanitation [Ref], may have major implications in the spread of
 the disease [Ref].
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These figures become even worse in regions immerse in 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597187165
procrasted 
\change_unchanged
armed conflicts, in which informal settlements of Internally Displaced P
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597187767
ersons
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597187765
opulation
\change_unchanged
 (IDP
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597187773
s
\change_unchanged
) are widespread.
 In these settlements, the number of inter-personal contacts is very high,
 with people often living in overcrowded tents.
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188609
This research focuses on a worse-case situation, the North West region of
 Syria (NWS): a relatively small geographical area hosting 4.2 million persons,
 including 1.15 million IDPs living in camps.
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597187964
For the region we take as a reference in this study, the North West of Syria,
 XX% of the households are IDP living in tents with XX people on average
 [Verify and Ref]
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188078
27.4% of NWS population is currently living in camps, and this proportion
 raises to 34.4% for the area of Idlib province
\change_unchanged
.
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597188199
Moreover, populations in these regions often have a high proportion of individua
ls suffering from comorbidities.

\change_unchanged
 In 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188296
NWS
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597188295
the NW Syria
\change_unchanged
, 10% of the 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188205
IDP 
\change_unchanged
population has a chronic disease, with 17% of them having no access to medicines
 [REF Reach doc], and it is often dependent on humanitarian organizations
 [data?].
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188310
This context is aggravated 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597188315
At a regional scale, the
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188316
by
\change_unchanged
 political 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188332
and security 
\change_unchanged
instability 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597188325
in areas affected by armed conflicts
\change_unchanged
 hinder
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188338
ing
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597188338
s
\change_unchanged
 the efficiency of coordinated actions
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188355
.
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597188354
,
\change_unchanged
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597188444
and
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188446
Moreover
\change_unchanged
 military operations 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597188653
ongoing in the area 
\change_unchanged
often prompt the exodus of the population.
 These movements could facilitate the transmission of the disease, also
 making tracing interventions unfeasible.
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597234918
At the local scale, a large number of informal camps (not registered by
 the WHO [APG, please precise]) have limited or no management [REF Reach],
 again precluding the implementation of interventions to limit the spread
 of the virus.
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To investigate feasible interventions in informal settlements (hereafter
 named 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

camps
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

), we considered a Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered model in which
 the population is divided into classes, reflecting the age-structure and
 the existence of comorbidities [Ref].
 We use this model to propose a number of interventions aimed at reducing
 the contacts within and between population classes in general, and with
 symptomatic individuals in particular.
 In order to incorporate these interventions, the model includes an explicit
 parametrization of the 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597235027
daily 
\change_unchanged
contacts 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597235036
that
\change_unchanged
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597235008
the populations
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597235042
of individuals
\change_unchanged
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597235047
have per day
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597242777
living in camps
\change_unchanged
, an approximation that was previously used to model the effect of similar
 interventions in minimizing the spread of the COVID-19 in African cities
 [Zandvoort].
 We build upon this approximation making a more explicit representation
 of the contacts, and of other parameters in the model.
 We paid special attention on the assumptions that the different interventions
 would have under the living conditions that exist in these camps.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We considered a worst-case scenario in which there is no access to any health-ca
re facility.
 We modelled previously proposed 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289109
non-medical 
\change_unchanged
interventions [Zandvoort] such as self-distancing, isolation of 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597288244
suspected 
\change_unchanged
symptomatic individuals
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597288198
 in individual tents
\change_unchanged
 and the creation of a 'safety zone' in which
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289129
 more
\change_unchanged
 vulnerable population
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289169
 and their accompanying persons are protected and cared of by their own
 community
\change_unchanged
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289175
becomes less
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289178
to reduce their
\change_unchanged
 expos
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289182
ion
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289181
ed
\change_unchanged
 to the virus.
 We elaborated in more detail previous models [Ref, Zandvoort] to take into
 account the micro-dynamics of the interactions, considering 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289221
questions such as the
\change_unchanged
 time
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289228
 than an individual takes
\change_unchanged
 to recognize 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289236
potential
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289234
the
\change_unchanged
 symptoms before self-isolati
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289242
on
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289241
ng
\change_unchanged
, 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289249
the
\change_unchanged
 effect
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289253
s
\change_unchanged
 of having 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
s to attend isolated individuals, or 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289258
the
\change_unchanged
 existence of a buffering zone in which exposed and protected population
 classes could interact under certain rules, among other 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289273
interventions
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289271
details
\change_unchanged
.
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289596
The combination of these community-based non-medical intervention reduces
 both the risk of having an outbreak within the informal settlement and
 the impact of an outbreak when it occurs.
 Altogether, these results should encourage the empowerment of local communities
 living in informal settlements with the knowledge and sufficient means
 to set up these entirely non-medical community-based strategies
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289437
Since empowering the local communities to understand
\change_unchanged
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289553
how to 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289560
to cope with the pandemic, while health systems are managed at the regional
 or national scale.
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289482
control the virus
\change_unchanged
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289464
is possibly the most (and perhaps unique) effective way to minimize its
 spread, the details we modelled become of outmost importance for a realistic
 implementation of the interventions
\change_unchanged
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Methods
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
The model
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We considered a discrete-time stochastic model simulating the spread of
 the virus in a single camp.
 The model is divided in compartments, containing individuals at different
 possible epidemiological stages along the progression of the disease (see
 Supplementary Material).
 The model additionally considers that the population is divided in different
 classes depending on the age-structure and comorbidities.
 The simulation starts with a population of susceptible individuals and
 then one individual becomes exposed.
 The progression of the disease in the individual goes through a series
 of infectious stages: a presymptomatic stage, and then either a symptomatic
 or asymptomatic stage, eventually infecting other suceptible individuals.
 Individuals are no longer infectious if they recover or if they die.
 The simulations run for 365 days, and we verified that a steady state was
 always reached before the limit of the simulation was achived.
 We did not considered any additional entry of infectious individuals in
 the camp during the simulation.
 Births and deaths due to other causes were not considered in the model,
 since populations changes due to the disease are much larger than those
 related to these processes, provided that there are no conflicts during
 the period simulated.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Population structure
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We considered data from the NW of Syria as a reference to parametrize the
 models [SOURCE].
 The population size of informal camps was log-normally distributed, with
 a mean size of 600 individuals.
 We simulated population sizes of 500, 1000 and 2000 individuals.
 Unless stated otherwise, the results presented refer to populations of
 2000 individuals, because interventions tend to be less effective in larger
 camps.
 The original data was structured in three population ages: age 1 (0-13
 years old), age 2 (14-50 yrs.) and age 3 (>50 yrs).
 For the classes correspondent to age 2 and 3, we additionally considered
 two subclasses comprising health individuals and individuals with comorbidities
, respectively.
 Therefore, in the absence of interventions, we considered 5 population
 classes, whose proportions are shown in Table [create Table].
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Epidemiological severity assumptions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important question to consider in the model is the access to health care.
 In the case of the region we are considering as a reference, NW Syria,
 there are available XXX beds in hospitals (XXX UCIs) and XX ventilators
 for 4.5 million people [Ref].
 Basic estimations predicted a collapse of the health facilities after 8
 weeks of the outbreak [].
 Given the additional difficulties that people living in the camps has to
 access these facilities [how to show this?], we considered a worst-case
 scenario in which individuals will not have access to health care.
 As a consequence, we assumed that symptomatic individuals requiring an
 ICU would die.
 More problematic is to estimate the fate of those individuals that would
 have symptoms with a severity requiring hospitalization but not necessarily
 ICU care, since in the absence of hospitalization their fate is uncertain.
 To address this point, and departing from previous models [Refs], we considered
 a hospitalization compartment.
 Since, as we said, hospitalization is unfeasible, these individuals are
 considered to stay in the camp and being infectious.
 Hence, the role of this compartment is to account for a longer infectious
 period for these individuals.
 This compartment will also help us to model more realistically some interventio
ns, for example noting that the severity of the symptoms for these individuals
 is incompatible with self-isolation.
 From this compartment, we simulated two possible extreme scenarios, one
 in which all these individuals would recover, and another in which these
 individuals will all die.
 This strategy allowed us to estimate upper and lower bounds for the different
 variables.
 In the simulations presented in the Main Text, we considered a worst-case
 scenario, namely the one in which all individuals die.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another consideration comes from the estimation of the fraction of the populatio
n that will suffer severe or very severe symptoms (parameters 
\begin_inset Formula $h_{i}$
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $g_{i}$
\end_inset

, see Table [Table]).
 These parameters are class-specific, but we gathered this data from studies
 in countries in which the living conditions are more favourable [Refs],
 and in which there is access to health care.
 Following previous work [Zandvoort], we considered that in, our setting,
 the fraction of individuals showing severe symptoms will be larger, and
 we implemented this fact mapping the population-classes in our model to
 population-classes 10 years older in the studies we took as a reference.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Transmissibility assumptions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In our model, individuals from the presymptomatic, asymptomatic, symptomatic
 and hospitalized compartments are equally infectious.
 Although asymptomatic individuals are often considered less infectious
 [Ref], the fraction of asymptomatic we considered was of 16% [Ref], which
 might be an underestimation after recent findings reporting up to 49% [Ref],
 and hence we opt to considered them equally infectious than symptomatic
 ones.
 The length of the time intervals that individuals spend in each compartment
 was retrieved from literature (see Table [Table] and Supplementary Material).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To model the contacts between individuals we considered that the number
 of contacts between individuals of different classes was the product of
 the mean number of contacts that an individual has per day (
\begin_inset Formula $\bar{c}_{i}$
\end_inset

, see Supplementary Materia) times the probability of finding an individual
 of other class, which is proportional to the proportion of that class in
 the total population.
 The 
\begin_inset Formula $\bar{c}_{i}$
\end_inset

 values were estimated from direct conversations with people managing the
 camps, although it was not possible to perform a formal survey.
 We estimated that individuals of age 1 have 25 contacts per day on average,
 those of age 2 have 15 contacts per day, and we fix to 10 contacts per
 day those of age 3.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The probability of getting infected after a contact with an infectious individua
l, 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

, was estimated considering a Gaussian distribution of the basic reproduction
 number 
\begin_inset Formula $R_{0}$
\end_inset

 with mean 4 and 99% CI=(3–5).
 These values were a compromise between values reported in the literature
 from cities including favelas, ranging from 
\begin_inset Formula $R_{0}$
\end_inset

=2.77, 3.44 in Abuja and Lagos, respectively (Nigeria, [Ref]); 
\begin_inset Formula $R_{0}$
\end_inset

 =3.3 in Buenos Aires (Argentina, [Ref]), to Rohinya's refugee camps that
 were estimated to be as high as 
\begin_inset Formula $R_{0}$
\end_inset

=5 [Ref].
 The probability distribution for 
\begin_inset Formula $\tau$
\end_inset

 was estimated randomly generating a value for 
\begin_inset Formula $R_{0}$
\end_inset

, and dividing the value by the real part of the main eigenvalue of the
 Next Generation Matrix (see Supplementary Material).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Interventions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
APG: A table similar to Table 1 in Zandvoort et al.
 would be great
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Self-distancing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We considered a situation in which all the population reduce the mean number
 of contacts per day by a certain amount (20% and 50%).
 Since the mean number of people per tent in a camp is 7 [verify], we considered
 that the number of contacts per day cannot be reduced by more than a 50%.
 Note that, for an adult, this would mean having 7.5 contacts per day.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Buffering zone
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When individual self-distancing cannot be achieved, a possible solution
 is to split the population in groups, and apply self-distancing measures
 to individuals belonging to different groups.
 We name the zones in which interactions between population groups occur
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

buffering zones
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 We assume that these zones are always open spaces, not occupied by more
 than 4 individuals wearing masks, and in which 2 meters of distance between
 individuals of different groups is guaranteed.
 This setting allowed us to assume a reduction in the probability of infection
 per contact of an 80% [Ref].
 An additional intervention we considered in some simulations, is that symptomat
ic individuals cannot access to a buffering zone.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Safety zone
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this intervention, it is considered that the camp is divided in two areas:
 a safety zone, in which more vulnerable people lives (that we will refer
 to as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

green
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 zone following previous studies [Ref]), and an exposed (orange) zone with
 the remainder population.
 In the simulations, it is always considered that the first exposed individual
 belongs to the orange zone.
 Contrary to the nomenclature followed in other studies (see e.g.
 [Ref]), we avoided the use of the term 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

shielding
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 for this intervention, since it may lead to a (misleading) picture in which
 it is believed that the vulnerable population is isolated into a closed
 space, such as a separated building.
 Such intervention would require additional assumptions on how contacts
 occur in such a space 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
APG: Are we aware of any study that address this point? there has been much
 controversy in the media around this
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 In our simulations, we instead assumed that the camp is split in two separated
 areas, and that the number of contacts between individuals living in different
 areas is reduced, while the living conditions within both areas remain
 otherwise the same.
 Therefore, the number of contacts per day and individual does not change
 unless self-distancing is implemented.
 In practice, this means that, for every individual, reducing the number
 of contacts with individuals living in the other zone, implies an increase
 in the number of contacts with the individuals in their own zone (see Supplemen
tary Material).
 This is important to investigate undesired side-effects that the split
 may have.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We also considered that individuals living in the green zone cannot leave
 that area, which means that supplies for this population should be provided
 by individuals in the exposed zone, and hence the contacts between both
 populations never vanishes.
 However, we considered that this interaction will always occur in a buffering
 zone, and we assumed that each individual in the green zone can have a
 maximum number of contacts per week with individuals of the orange zone:
 either 10 or 2 contacts per week for each individual.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important social question to be addressed in this intervention is how
 population will be distributed in the two zones, since different partitionings
 may have a different reception in the population.
 We considered the following isolation scenarios: i) elderly population
 only (age 3); ii) elderly population and adults (age 2) with comorbidities;
 and iii) elderly, adults with comorbidities, and other adults (e.g.
 spouses or 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
s) and their young kids (< 13 yrs.
 and not exceeding 40% of the population in the green zone).
 For the scenario iii) we considered, in turn, three additional possibilities,
 in which the total population in the green zone represent 20%, 25% or a
 maximum of 30% of the total population.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Lockdown of the safety zone
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An additional measure that can incorporated once the safety zone is implemented,
 is a further reduction in the number of contacts occuring in the buffering
 zone after the first symptomatic case in the orange zone is identified.
 We refer to this reduction as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

lockdown
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 (of the safety zone).
 Again, since supplies for people living in the green zone cannot be disrupted,
 we assumed that the number of contacts per week and individual is reduced
 by a 50% or a maximum of a 90% (see Table XXX)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Self-isolation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A challenge in informal settlements is how self-isolation can be interpreted
 when households have a single, and often small space.
 Moreover, water should be collected at specific locations, there are communal
 latrines and the scarcity of food supplies do not allow for the isolation
 of whole families.
 We considered the possibility that individuals showing symptoms self-isolate
 in individual tents in dedicated spaces of the camps, or next to the tents
 of their relatives.
 To simulate a more realistic scenario, we considered that there is a minimum
 time for an individual to recognize his/her own symptoms, within a period
 ranging from 12 to 48 hours (see Table XXX).
 In addition, we considered that there are a number of 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
s dedicated to supply food and water to isolated individuals, interacting
 in a buffering zone.
 In Supplementary Material we show that considering one 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
 per individual having one contact per day, we account for both the positive
 effects of isolation and the negative effects derived from the contact
 with 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
s, since the probability of infection with the rest of the population cannot
 be neglected.
 In this respect, we considered that people moving to a severely symptomatic
 stage (hospitalized compartment) becomes fully infectious.
 The rationale behind this choice is that this individuals require a more
 intensive care, and hence it is expected that the rules imposed for a buffering
 zone cannot be longer fulfilled.
 We modelled this intervention for an increasing number of tents from 10
 to an unlimited number (see Table XXX).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsubsection*
Evacuation
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The last intervention refers to the possibility of evacuating severely symptomat
ic individuals, i.e.
 those in the hospitalization compartment.
 This measure does not change the fate of the evacuated individuals.
 Hence, we assume that the evacuation will not be to a hospital but to some
 sort of isolation center 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
APG: Chamsy, I think it would be great to document here that this is a possibili
ty considered by policy-makers.
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 In this way, the measure will reduce the infectiousness of these individuals
 to zero.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Analysis of the interventions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For each implementation of the interventions, we run 500 simulations, analysing
 results arising from the incorporation of an intervention with respect
 to a set of simulations in which the intervention was absent.
 The main variables we considered in the comparisons were the fraction of
 casualties in the population, the case fatality rates (CFR), the fraction
 of population recovered and the time at which it is observed a peak in
 the number of symptomatic.
 We focused on the symptomatic population, because it is the most informative
 measure in settings in which there is no access to other tests.
 We additionally considered the fraction of simulations in which at least
 one death is observed as a proxy for the probability of outbreak.
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Note that interventions will affect CFR only when interventions have a different
ial effect among population classes, and hence we will mostly refer to the
 fraction of deaths in our analysis instead
\end_layout

\end_inset

 For consistency, when we compared the statistics of a given variable between
 two interventions, only simulations in which there was an outbreak were
 considered.
 When it was needed to individuate if differences between interventions
 were significant, we conducted statistical analysis: t– or Welch–tests
 for pairwise comparisons depending on whether normality is fulfilled, and
 Tukey tests for multiple comparisons among non-orthogonal variables.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection*
Results
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
When interventions are absent, the CFR takes values around 2% when we consider
 that individuals that would require hospitalization (but not ICU) are recovered
, raising up to ~11% when we considered that all would die 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
APG: Verify these values
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 Unless otherwise stated, in the following we consider the latter scenario
 to evaluate the interventions.
 In such scenario, the probability of observing an outbreak is close to
 0.85, having that 10% of the population in the camp would die and that ~83%
 of the population would recover, with the number of symptomatic cases peaking
 after 55 days.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Self-distancing has a notable effect for the probability of outbreak, with
 a 10% decrease when just a reduction of a 20% in the number of contacts
 was considered (Fig.
 2A).
 It was, however, needed a reduction of up to 50% to observe a more nuanced
 decrease in the fraction of population dying, that could be reduced as
 much as a 35% (Fig.
 2B).
 The same occurs for the time to the peak of symptomatics (Fig.
 2C), which increases up to 110 days, hence doubling the values when there
 are no interventions in place.
 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Recovered?
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Self-isolation brings a strong decrease close to a 30% in the fraction of
 population dying, when only 10 tents are available for a population of
 2000 individuals, i.e.
 a 0.5% of the total population (Fig.
 2).
 Interestingly, increasing the number of tents does not improve much this
 reduction and, when the number of tents represent a 10% of the population,
 the fraction of deaths even increases.
 This effect is due to the assumption that each individual requires one
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
 (see Supplementary Material).
 A side effect of this policy is that, when the number of isolated population
 increases, it also increases the number of healthy individuals in contact
 with the isolated population.
 Still, the Case Fatality Rate experience a continuous, albeit small, reduction
 with an increasing number of tents (Supplementary Fig.
 XX).
 The probability of observing an outbreak and the time in whch the symptomatic
 cases peak have a minimum (maximum) when ~1% of tents are considered (Fig.
 2).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Importantly, these results hold when we assume that the time required for
 individuals to recognize their symptoms is of 24h on average, and the intervent
ion becomes less effective when this time increases (Supplementary Fig.
 XX).
 On the other hand, reducing this time to 12h does not significantly reduce
 the fraction of people dying 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
This should be tested
\end_layout

\end_inset

, but it does increase the time in which the number of symptomatic cases
 peak (Supplementary Figs.
 XX and XX).
 If we additionally consider that the symptomatic cases that would require
 hospitalization are evacuated, it is only observed a 2% reduction in the
 fraction of individuals dying (Supplementary Fig.
 XXX).
 Since we assumed that the evacuation does not change their fate, the interventi
on only affects their infectivity.
 Although the period between developing more important symptoms and dying
 is relatively long (~10 days), the number of individuals under these conditions
 is small, when compared to the rest of the infected population.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Creating a safety zone improves overall the effect of previous interventions,
 but sometimes with different outcomes for the exposed and protected populations.
 For instance, the probability of outbreak decreases very strongly (almost
 40%) for the protected population (see Fig.
 XX).
 Notably, approximately 16% of this reduction is due to the health checks
 performed to get into the buffering zone, which exclude symptomatic individuals
 (Suppl.
 Fig.
 XX).
 On the other hand, the probability of outbreak may increase for the exposed
 population if the contacts per week and per individual occuring in the
 buffering zone are reduced to 2.
 This is a consequence of an increased number of contacts within subpopulations,
 which may also explain the increase in the CFR of the protected population
 (Supplementary Fig.
 XX), 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Understand this.
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 Despite of this side-effect, the fraction of individuals dying for the
 protected subpopulation and, in turn, globally, is reduced.
 Another important observation from this intervention is the notable increase
 of the time to peak of symptomatics, raising up to 35% globally, and to
 70% for the protected population.
 Regarding the population that should move to the safety zone, having only
 elderly or at most elderly and adults with comorbidities, guarantee a low
 probability of outbreak, which would otherwise increase the global fraction
 of population dying (Supplementary Fig.
 XX).
 Positive effects of the safety zone are even more marked for smaller population
 sizes, except for the time to peak of symptomatic, which has a weaker effect
 for smaller populations (Supplementary Fig.
 XXX and XXX).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The incorporation of a lockdown again shows the side-effect in which if
 there is an outbreak in the safety zone, it has more negative effects,
 due to the increased number of contacts of individuals within the zone
 (Fig.
 XXX).
 However, the probability of outbreak is very strongly reduced to a barely
 10% and, consequently, when there is an outbreak in the camp (which in
 most of the cases will not reach the safe zone) the fraction of deaths
 globally reduces (Fig.
 XXX).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Finally, the combination of interventions add their effects approximately
 as it was shown when they were incorporated individually (Fig.
 XXX).
 In particular, the creation of a safety zone improves the benefits of the
 other interventions, and there are not noticeable side effects beyond those
 previously described.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section*
Discussion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289617
article
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289618
research
\change_unchanged
, we proposed a number of feasible interventions of immediate applicability,
 for 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289634
human
\change_unchanged
 informal settlements.
 We took as reference settlements of IDP
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289648
s
\change_unchanged
 in the NW of Syria, and 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289720
took into account 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289730
we discussed 
\change_unchanged
the feasibility of the different interventions
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289763
, their cultural acceptance 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289780
 with local stakeholders, to individuate its economical viability and potential
 cultural issues
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289793
 and the need for low-cost solutions
\change_unchanged
.
 In general, we considered worst case scenarios, 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289817
possibly (hopefully)
\change_unchanged
 leading to a
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289827
n
\change_unchanged
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289830
probable 
\change_unchanged
overestimation of the number of casualties but 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289875
that, in this way, 
\change_unchanged
mak
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289879
ing
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289878
es
\change_unchanged
 more apparent the potential
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289889
 effects
\change_unchanged
 of the interventions.
 Our results are aligned with previous works XXX
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
we should comment other results
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Self-distancing proves to be an efficient measure, and reducing the number
 of contacts to a 50% has the most important effect among all the interventions.
 Such a reduction 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289956
may
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289955
is
\change_unchanged
, however,
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597289962
 be
\change_unchanged
 difficult to achieve, 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597289969
for example 
\change_unchanged
due to the large 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290020
population under 14 years
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290004
6-13 year's
\change_unchanged
 old 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290029
fraction of the population 
\change_unchanged
which 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290046
may 
\change_unchanged
have high motility 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290061
with
\change_unchanged
in the 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290067
settlements
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290058
camps
\change_unchanged
 and little control.
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
perhaps a little bit unrigurous the last point
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
We proposed the implementation of self-isolation 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290078
using
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290077
with
\change_unchanged
 individual tents, that could be located either in a dedicated zone in the
 camp or next to the tents of relatives, with a buffering zone (
\begin_inset Formula $\sim2\ m^{2})$
\end_inset

 in-between.
 We think this intervention is more likely to be accepted 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290122
in NW Syria 
\change_unchanged
than the evacuation to 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290129
community-based 
\change_unchanged
isolation centers 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290179
which poses cultural challenges
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290140
without health care
\change_unchanged
 [APG.
 Include reference to public plans of WHO].

\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290608
 The use of individual isolation tents is effective even for a number of
 individual tents as low as 5 to 10 per 1000 capita in the settlement.

\change_unchanged
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290538

\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard

\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
One of the parameters that we assessed is the need for care-givers for individua
lly isolated individuals.
 Altough, in many cases it will be impossible to discern Covid-19 from other
 affections by the community, 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290357
Without testing, it is difficult to know if symptoms are truly associated
 to COVID-19, and hence
\change_unchanged
 an increase in the contacts between 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290389
individually isolated 
\change_unchanged
individuals 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
and their care-givers 
\change_unchanged
may increase the infectivity
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290430
, also among carers if they do not have effective protection measures
\change_unchanged
.
 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290534
Our proposal is effective even for a number of tents is as low as 0.5-1%
 of the total population in the camp.

\change_unchanged
 We considered that there is one 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
 per individual isolated with a daily contact in a buffering zone, and this
 choice shows that increasing the number of isolated individuals
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290710
 over xx cases
\change_unchanged
 increases the infectivity
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290757
, due to the consequent increase of exposed care-givers
\change_unchanged
.
 This could be circumvented with a more organized group of
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290750
 trained
\change_unchanged
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290774
care-giver
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290774
carer
\change_unchanged
s, which would reduce the number of total contacts with infectious individuals.
 The intervention is effective even though we assumed that individuals requiring
 hospitalization should leave the tents due to their need of care, and hence
 they become fully infectious
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290824

\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290833
Not sure to inderstand well
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\change_unchanged
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597290894
intervention consisting in seperating the settlement in two zones, one of
 which is a 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290899
creation of a 
\change_unchanged
safety zone
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597290949
 is an interesting intervention that we propose should keep
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291020
does not modify the composition of the settlement, not 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291027
 the same setting in terms of
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291028
the
\change_unchanged
 number of people per tent and distance between tents.
 This would mitigate side-effects derived from an increase in the number
 of contacts between vulnerable population
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291064

\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout

\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291080
I am not sure how important is to keep this remark.
\change_unchanged

\end_layout

\end_inset


\change_unchanged
.
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291356
In our modelization, we considered that contacts between the individuals
 within the safety zone are not reduced as compared to the exposed zone,
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291380
Still, we implemented this increase exactly compensating the reduction in
 the number of contacts with the other population,
\change_unchanged
 and we observed in some cases 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291394
side-effects such as 
\change_unchanged
an increase in the fraction of deaths in the protected population
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291409
, justifying these concerns
\change_unchanged
.
 However, these side-effects are compensated by the strong reduction in
 the probability of outbreak in the safety zone that this intervention provides,
 which leads to an overall reduction in the fraction of deaths in the whole
 camp.
 Moreover, 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291551
in NWS Syria there are about 1000 camps, which will statistically justify
 such an intervention.
 Most importantly, 
\change_unchanged
it is unrealistic to think that the level of 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291561
contacts
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291559
activity
\change_unchanged
 will be maintained in the safety zone
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291570
 if an outbreak occurs in the camp
\change_unchanged
, which would 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291610
lower the chances of such side-effects
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291588
readily control for any side-effects
\change_unchanged
.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
An important question for the success of this intervention comes from the
 efficiency of the buffering zone.
 The reduction in the number of contacts per week
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291697
 in the buffering zone between individuals living in the safety zone and
 individuals from the exposed zone
\change_unchanged
, the implementation of basic health checks to identify symptomatic individuals,
 and the eventual lockdown, have notable effects.
 Also important is which population should be shielded.
 Protecting only elderly and at most adults with comorbidities have the
 most beneficial effects, and the intervention becomes less effective when
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291726
healthy
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291724
more
\change_unchanged
 adults and kids are included.
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291872
However, the elderly and individuals with comorbidities need care-givers,
 and leaving them alone might have more deleterious effects than allowing
 accompanying persons.
 This also allows to preserve the social cohesion of the population.
 
\change_unchanged
Another relevant consideration is the fraction of population recovered,
 that may help to reach herd immunity.
 We observed that unless a self-distancing of 50% is considered, the fraction
 of population recovered is close to a 75%, which is quite promising to
 prevent future outbreaks.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Decisions on which population should be protected are one example of social
 challenges that may become more complex in practice.
 Another example we did not address is that it is unlikely that a kid 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291934
under 13 is individually
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291931
becomes
\change_unchanged
 isolated 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291941
alone in a tent
\change_unchanged
.
 
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597291966
Altough the number of 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291970
The number 
\change_unchanged
of exceptions to the cases proposed are possibly endless, 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597291990
but we should ask if it is needed to run a simulation to predict the outcome
 of these exceptions
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597292050
our results demonstrate that a community-based approach can be effective,
 much more than health-based responses which may take years to reach the
 needed level of response
\change_unchanged
.
 In this respect, 
\change_deleted 1315279813 1597292078
we believe that the importance of these results comes from the fact that
 the examples may help individuals to understand the dynamics of the virus,
 and then to adapt to new situations and to look for alternatives
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597292190
this modelization research demonstrates that in an extreme environment like
 NW Syria alternative responses can be efficient if the dynamics of the
 virus are well understood by the local communities and if they can implement
 at least some of the interventions proposed in this research
\change_unchanged
.
 Given the highly dynamic environment existing in the camps and the slow
 reaction of the local and international authorities, empowering the local
 population is possibly the best, if not the only way, to help these communities
\change_inserted 1315279813 1597292365
, not only for the IDP camps of NW Syria, but in many other cases: slums
 in India, Africa and South America, isolated rural villages in Africa,
 South America and east Asia and in areas with large numbers of IDPs such
 as South Sudan or Colombia
\change_unchanged
.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
