#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass scrartcl
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Part*
List of interventions as discussed with Chamsy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Important note: after discussing with Chamsy, we have decided that all people
 whose symptoms are severe enough to require hospitalization (H) will be
 taken out of the camp, either to the hospital or to community isolation
 beds (CIB)–currently the WHO is setting up 1500 CIB, but that could be
 ramped up to a maximum of 10,000 if we use all the empty schools and other
 empty buildings.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Therefore, for the purpose of our model, beta_H will be set to zero (it
 would even make sense to abolish the R/D and D compartments).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Both models will be run until we reach herd immunity in the orange zone.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Chamsy wants to measure 2 outcomes: 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
As discussed previously, how many people would enter the H compartment.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
How long it will take for the disease to enter the green zone (starting
 from one infected individual in the orange zone).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Null model: well-mixed population (the whole camp is an orange zone as described
 previously)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Intervention: green and orange zones
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Who are the people shielded in the green zone?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Elderly people (50+), comorbid and non-comorbid
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Adults (13-50) with comorbidities 
\series bold
AND 
\series default
some family members if an arrangement cannot be found for the kids.
 
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

We have decided to establish the rule that no more than 20% of the camp
 can be shielded (otherwise it would be impossible to reach immunity).
 
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

In a camp of 2000 people, we estimated that 119 are elderly and 125 are
 adult comorbid.
 Hence, up to 156 healthy adults (spouses of comorbids) and kids (of comorbids)
 can be shielded with them.
 Among those 156 healthy people, we arbitrarily estimated that 70 would
 be adult spouses and 86 would be children.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Contacts between people in the green zone and in the orange zone
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
We assume that people in the green zone are self-sufficient and do not require
 carers (adults with comorbidities and their healthy spouses could take
 on the role of carers without having to leave the green zone at any time).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Family meetings can happen in the neutral zone.
 Every shielded person would be allowed to see family members once a week.
 Those family members would be checked for temperature and symptoms, so
 they should only belong to one of the following compartments: susceptible
 (S), exposed (E), presymptomatic (P) and asymptomatic (A).
 Everyone in these neutral zones would be required to wear a mask and stay
 1.5 meters apart.
 The neutral zone would be an open tent.
 Assuming a small fraction of non-compliance, we estimated that the transmission
 rates in the neutral zone would be 20% of the normal transmission rate.
 
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset

We want to test two different rules for the maximum number of family members
 a person in the green zone would be allowed to see at a time (once a week):
 2 and 10 (we could add intermediate numbers if it feels useful).
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
